We've seen quite a few prepositions up until now, these words that refer to movement or position or direction.
For example, we had two words for for.
What were they?
Para and por.
Good.
And how did we say from or of?
De with con in or on
N.
Good.
So we've seen quite a few of those.
Now prepositions in Spanish won't come at the end of the sentence as they can in English.
We've seen this already as well.
Do you remember how to say where are you from?
You are speaking informally from ser is eres.
Eres.
So how would you say where are you from?
De dónde eres?
So in English, where are you from?
We're putting the preposition at the end of the sentence and that's fine in English, but it's incorrect Spanish.
So you don't say where are you from?
You say from where are you?
De dónde eres?
If we want to say where are you going in Spanish, we say to where are you going?
What was you are going speaking informally?
Bus Thus.
Good, so to where are you going?
Adondevas.
Good.
We are going to the United States.
The United States is Estados Unidos.
United States.
Estados Unidos.
And I should mention you don't translate the word for the.
You just say we are going to United States.
Vamos a Estados Unidos.
We discussed the concept before about working backwards.
So instead of building up to say what we want to say, finding bits of language and working backwards
to find the two form of a verb.
So for example, imagine we looked up somewhere, United States, or we asked somebody how to say United States and we came across Estados Unidos
We can use or needos to work backwards to work out what is the verb to unite.
How do you think that is
Unidar.
Not guessing, but really working backwards, which instead of building up, building down, instead of adding bits on to the verb
Seeing what has been added and consciously taking it off.
Ah, so either has been added.
When you add either, you take off the ending of the two form.
And what is the ending with either?
ER or ER.
You should experiment and see which one feels more natural to you.
Now, the one that you may have heard before is probably going to be
feel more natural even if you didn't register it.
So if you heard before the correct version, it's gonna feel more natural.
And also the more words you learn in Spanish
the greater intuition you get about the phonetics of Spanish, what sounds more Spanish.
So that should direct you when you say uner, unir, uner, unir, to understand which one is to unite.
Which one do you think it is?
Somehow I think it's unir.
Unir.
But at this stage there's no reason for you to know what sounds more Spanish.
This intuition is something that occurs with practice and exposure and listening.
But working backwards is a useful skill that we want to employ in our language learning journey.
So we said that prepositions won't come at the end.
So if we say for example, the girl I work with
In Spanish we will say the girl with which with that with who I work.
We have the option.
So what was to work?
Do you remember?
Trabajo trabajar.
Trabajar.
Good.
The girl is la chica.
La chica.
Is kind of informal but very common.
La Chica, how do you think the guy would be if the girl is La Chica?
El chico.
So we can begin with the one that we know already, which is with that.
Con que, the girl with that I work.
La chica con que yo trabajo.
La chica con que trabajo.
You don't need the yo, and let's show emphasizing.
La chica con que yo trabajo.
We could also say with which la chica conqual trabajo.
We could say with who la chica con quien trabajo.
We could even put
Lake or laqual, which means witch or that, but we're showing that it's a feminine witch or a feminine that
La chica con la cual trabajo.
La chica con la que trabajo.
You have all of those options in Spanish, but don't worry about them.
You can just use que
So whilst you have all of those options and you will hear them and when you get comfortable with hearing them and understanding them you will start using the different ones without really thinking about it very much.
You don't want to worry about it now, ke you can use for everything, for all of that.
La chica con qué trabajo.
So it's correct.
Yeah, it's correct Spanish.
But you have all of those options.
La chica concual trabajo.
La chica con la cual trabajo, la chica con la que trabajo, la chica con quién trabajo.
The girl that I was working with.
So how would you say it is?
It is the girl I was working with.
Let's go through it slowly.
It is the girl.
Es la chica.
With who?
Con que I was working, I used to work.
So it's trabajar and that becomes
Es la chica con que
Trabajaba.
Es la chica con que trabajaba.
How would you say the girl with whom?
The girl that I was going to the party with.
The girl with whom or with that?
with which all of us are okay in Spanish.
La chica con que.
La chica con que I was going to the party.
So I was going is the line version of ir.
Which is irregular, but we can remember that it takes a little bit from the two options that we have to make the line version.
We have abba for our verbs and ia for er-ir verbs
And the verb ir kind of blended together abba and iah and came up with
Iba, uh.
So you can think of it that way.
You can think of it like abba and i are kind of blending together to have iba, or you can think of it like the present, ba, but with an i before.
In the past it's spelt with a B, I B A E Ba, where in the present it's spelt with a V, V-A.
But as we know, they are very similar sounding.
So it's like the present with an I before.
So in the present you have his going, El-Va or El-Ba.
And then in the past, El Iba.
So I was going, he was going, she was going, it was going, you formal were going is EPA.
So the girl with which I was going to the party.
La chica con che iba a la fiesta.
Good.
So you can say
La chica con la qual, la chica con quien, la chica con la que, you have all of these options
Let's use qual in a sentence which is the word for witch.
Then it's not just a witch like this to connect the girl with witch.
You can also use it like a question.
Which one do you want?
You probably can guess we don't need the word for one.
Qualquieres?
Good.
Which one do you want?
Qualquieres?
Good.
So qual qual C-U-A-L means which
I know from saber to know was se.
We said it's very irregular, just S-E.
I know.
Se.
Good.
How would you say I don't know which one he wants?
No sé qual quiere.
Good.
How would you say I don't know which one he wants to see?
No sé cuál quiere ver.
No sé qual quiere ver.
Good.
Now what if you wanted to say I don't know with which one he wants to do it?
I don't know which one he wants to do it with.
Well you said the with already yeah
So it's just law at the end.
Yeah, and you will might you might feel this temptation often to repeat the preposition again at the end, even if you put it before, because that English is pushing through with the negative language transfer.
No sé con cual quiere hacerlo.
I don't know with which one he wants to do it.
I don't know which one he wants to do it with.
So we don't put the preposition at the end of the sentence in Spanish.
We will rearrange the sentence
And whilst this sounds more formal in English, of course it doesn't sound more formal in Spanish, it's just the only correct option.
The word for who, we've mentioned very briefly, is kien.
Good.
If you want to say who is going, what what verb version will who go with?
Who is who?
Is it you?
Is it them?
Is it he, she it?
Who is who?
He she it.
Good.
So how would you say who is going?
Quiemba, good.
And in Spanish you have the plural of who.
If you
Expecting more than one person if you know that your who refers to more than one person, you can put kien into plural.
So how do you think that would sound?
Quiénes?
Yeah, quienes.
So if you want to say who's going and and you know it's more than one person
Quiénes van.
Good.
And you changed the verb as well to match.
Qienes van?
Good.
How would you say who is here?
It's your location
Quién está aquí.
Good.
And if you knew you were talking about here, you could just leave that out.
As we have the sense of location.
With Estar, we don't really need to say the here if we know that we're talking about here.
Like we said before, if you knock on someone's door, you just say estás.
Because we are using a star and we're talking about states, that's enough context for us if we just leave it by itself to understand that we are speaking about location.
So you could just say who is
Quién está?
I don't know with who I have to do it.
I don't know who I have to do it with.
How is I have to
What have do we use to get the meaning of have to?
Tengo.
Tener.
Tener to have.
I have
Tengo.
Good.
And to get the meaning of I have to.
Tengo ke.
Tengo ke
So I don't know who I have to do it with.
I don't know with who I have to do it
No sé con quién tengo que hacerlo.
Good.
Or if we knew we meant more than one person, no sé con quiénes.
Tengo que hacerlo.
Good.
How would you say?
I don't know who I have to do it for.
I don't know for who I have to do it.
No sé para quién tengo que hacerlo.
No sé para quién lo tengo que hacer, o no sé para quién tengo que hacerlo.
What if you wanted to say, I don't know who I have to do it because of?
I don't know who I have to do it because of.
So how would that sound?
No sé por quién tengo que hacerlo.
No sé por quién lo tengo que hacer.